1 Introduction
Order Primates
Primates are a diverse group of mammals that have evolved from a group of insectivorous mammals some 60 million years ago. Indeed, it is difficult to define primates since they lack a single feature that separates them from other mammalian groups. At the same time, primates have remained plesiomorphic, retaining many ancestral features, rather than becoming highly apomorphic as did many groups of mammals, for example, the horse with a single digit in each foot.
Today, there are nearly 300 primate species grouped into about 80 genera (depending on the source), most of which live in tropical or subtropical regions of the world. The majority of living primate taxa are monkeys, and are present in both the New and Old Worlds, while prosimians are found in Madagascar, Africa, and Asia, the great apes inhabit Africa, Borneo, and Sumatra, and the lesser apes live in many regions of Southeast Asia. The remaining primate species, Homo sapiens, is the only living hominid and is found in most regions of the world. The primate classification presented here is often referred to as the traditional one since it is based on the level or grade of organization of the different primate groups. Table 1.1 presents a classification of living primates. This list includes only the primates examined in this book, and therefore does not represent a complete list of all extant genera. Classifications and scientific names often change through time; I have therefore attempted to include the changes that have occurred since the original version of this book appeared in 1976.
Dental cast collection
The basic data presented in this book were taken from plaster casts made from alginate impressions. The impressions and casts were made of the permanent and deciduous teeth of primate skulls housed in the following museums: American Museum of Natural History, National Museum of
1
Table 1.1. Classification of living primates studied in this book
 
ORDER PRIMATES
Suborder: Prosimii
Infraorder: Lemuriformes
Superfamily: Lemuroidea
Family: Lemuridae Lemur catta
Eulemur macaco
E. rubiventer
E. mongoz
Varecia variegata
Hapalemur griseus
Family: Lepilemuridae
Lepilemur mustelinus
Family: Cheirogaleidae
Microcebus murinus
Cheirogaleus major
Phaner furcifer
Family: Indriidae
Indri indri
Propithecus verreauxi
Avahi laniger
Family: Daubentoniidae
Daubentonia madagascariensis
Superfamily: Lorisoidea
Family: Lorisidae
Loris tardigradus
Nycticebus coucang
Perodicticus potto
Arctocebus calabarensis
Family: Galagidae
Otolemur crassicaudatus
Galago senegalensis
Infraorder: Tarsiiformes
Superfamily: Tarsioidea
Family: Tarsiidae
Tarsius spectrum
T. bancanus
T. syrichta
Suborder: Anthropoidea
Infraorder: Platyrrhini
Superfamily: Ceboidea
Family: Cebidae
Subfamily: Callitrichinae
Saguinus geoffroyi
Leontopithecus rosalia
Callithrix penicillata
Cebuella pygmaea
Callimico goeldii	Subfamily: Cebinae Cebus apella
Saimiri sciureus
S. oerstedii
Subfamily: Aotinae
Aotus trivirgatus
Family: Atelidae
Subfamily: Callicebinae
Callicebus moloch
Subfamily: Atelinae
Ateles geoffroyi
A. belzebuth
A. paniscus
A. fusciceps
Lagothrix lagotricha
Alouatta palliata
A. seniculus
A. belzebul
Brachyteles arachnoides
Subfamily: Pitheciinae Cacajo calvus
Chiropotes satanas
Pithecia pithecia
Infraorder: Catarrhini
Superfamily: Cercopithecoidea
Family: Cercopithecidae
Subfamily: Cercopithecinae
Macaca nemestrina
M. mulatta
M. fascicularis
M. nigra
Lophocebus albigena
L. aterrimus
Cercocebus torquatus
C. galeritus
Papio cynocephalus
Theropithecus gelada
Mandrillus sphinx
Cercopithecus nictitans
C. cephus
C. mona
C. mitis
C. lhoesti
C. neglectus
C. ascanius
Chlorocebus aethiops
Erythrocebus patas
Miopithecus talapoin
Dental cast collection
Table 1.1 (cont.)
ORDER PRIMATES (cont.)
Subfamily: Colobinae Piliocolobus badius
Colobus polykomos
Presbytis comata
Trachypithecus pileatus
T. cristata
T. phyrei
Pygathrix nemaeus
Simias concolor
Nasalis larvatus
Rhinopithecus roxellanae
Kasi johnii	Superfamily: Hominoidea
Family: Hylobatidae
Hylobates klossi
H. moloch
H. lar
H. syndactylus Family: Pongidae
Pongo pygmaeus
Gorilla gorilla
Pan troglodytes
P. paniscus
Sources: Martin (1990), Swindler (1998), Fleagle (1999).
Natural History (Smithsonian Institution), Chicago Field Museum, and The Cleveland Museum of Natural History. Casts were also made of specimens in the collections of Dr Neil C. Tappen and Henry C. McGill.
The casting technique is relatively simple and provides permanent material for detailed study in the laboratory. All casts were poured within five to ten minutes after the impressions were made; this minimizes the possibility of dimensional change (Skinner, 1954). In addition, a study has shownthat measurementstaken on dental casts are directly comparable to measurements of the original teeth (Swindler, Gavan and Turner, 1963). The observed differences are more likely due to instrumentation than to dimensional change resulting from the dental materials. All casts were made by my assistants and myself.
The original specimens were collected for the respective museums and comefrommanydifferentgeographicareasoftheworld.Inthemajorityof cases, species are represented from a wide range within their normal geographic range, although in certain groups, e.g. Papio cynocephalus, the animalswerecollectedfroma morelimitedareaandmaywellapproximate an interbreeding population. Macaca mulatta specimens from Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico were used as well as M. nemestrina from the Regional PrimateResearch Center at the University of Washington. Unfortunately, several species were represented by only a few specimens, or in one or two cases, by a single specimen. This usually meant that these species were rare in museum collections and because of constraints of money and time, it was impossible to increase the sample. Also, the manner in which specimens were collected in the field influenced the randomness of a sample and anyonewho hasusedmuseumcollectionsis quickto realizethisfact.There are obviously other biases in such a collection of specimens (ca. 2000) as studied in this book. However, since the principal objective of this work is to describe the normal dentition and present a statement of the range and magnitude of dental variability within the major genera and species of extant primates, the influences of these unavoidable biases should be mitigated.
The sex of the animals was determined in the field at the time of collection and any specimen of doubtful sex was excluded from the study. In the analytical descriptions in each section of the book the sexes are pooled unless otherwise stated.
The illustrations of the upper and lower teeth of all of the species in the book, unless otherwise stated, were drawn by Dr Robert M. George, Departmentof Biology,FloridaInternationalUniversity,Miami,Florida. The number in millimeters (mm) that appears in the caption of each illustration represents the length of the maxillary arch of the original specimen measured from the mesial surface of the upper central incisors to a line perpendicular to the distal surfaces of the maxillary third molars or, in the callitrichids, the second molars.
Odontometry
All tooth measurements were taken with a Helios caliper. The arms were ground to fine points for greater accuracy. Mesiodistal and buccolingual dimensions of maxillary and mandibular teeth were taken. In all odontometric calculations, the sample size (n) refers to the number of animals measured. This procedure is more realistic than presenting the number of teeth measured since it is well known that there are very few significant differences between the dimensions of right and left teeth. The right side is presented here; however, if a tooth was badly worn or absent its antimere was used. Also, teeth exhibiting noticeable wear were excluded. It should also be mentioned that in many cases the n presented in Appendix 1 differs from the number of animals studied in the morphological section for a given species. This is due to the fact that in many cases the teeth could be examined for a particular morphological trait, yet were too worn to measure, or vice versa.
Repeated measurements taken on the same teeth revealed an average difference between measurements of 0.2mm. The teeth were measured by Odontometry
 
Fig. 1.1. Odontometric landmarks. B, breadth; L, length. Reprinted from Swindler, D. R. (1976) Dentition of Living Primates, with the permission of Academic Press Inc. (London) Ltd.
the author and research assistants, each of whom was trained by the author. The measurements are shown in Fig. 1.1 and are defined as follows.
Incisors
LENGTH. Mesiodistal diameter taken at the incisal edge of the upper and lower incisors.
BREADTH. Buccolingual diameter taken at the cementoenamel junction at a right angle to the mesiodistal diameter.
Canines
LENGTH. Upper canine: diameter from the mesial surface to the distolingual border. Lower canine: mesiodistal diameter measured at the level of the mesial alveolar margin.
BREADTH. Buccolingual diameter taken at the cementoenamel junction at a right angle to the mesiodistal diameter.
Premolars
LENGTH. Maximum mesiodistal diameter taken between the contact
points. If the mesial contact is lacking on P or P owing to a diastema

between it and the canine, the maximum horizontal distance is measured from the distal contact point to the most mesial point on the surface of the premolar. The same method is used on primates with three premolars, for
example, P or P are measured as described above for P and P .
		
BREADTH. Maximum buccolingual diameter taken at a right angle to the mesiodistal diameter.
Molars
LENGTH. Maximum mesiodistal diameter taken on the occlusal surface between the mesial and distal contact points.
BREADTH. Maximum buccolingual diameter measured at a right angle to the mesiodistal dimension. The breadths of both the trigon (trigonid) and the talon (talonid) were taken in this manner.
Statistical calculations for means and standard deviations (s.d.) were performedfor the dental measurements of each species by sex. Hypotheses of equality of means between sexes of each species, where the sampleswere large enough, were tested by using the appropriate small sample t-test statistic (Sokal and Rohlf, 1969). The results of the t-tests for sexual dimorphism are presented for each species in the odontometric tables in Appendix 1.
Dental terminology
The incisors and canines are known as the anterior teeth; premolars and molars are the posterior teeth (Fig. 1.2). The tooth surfaces facing toward the cheek are called the buccal surfaces (odontologists often distinguish between the buccal and labial surfaces, labial being limited to the incisor and canine surfaces facing the lips, i.e. labia). All surfaces facing the tongue are referred to as lingual. The mesial (anterior) surface of a tooth faces toward the front of the oral cavity; those more distant are called the distal (posterior) surfaces. A cusp is defined as having structural or functional occlusal areal components delimited by developmental grooves and having independentapexes. The principalcusps, conulesand styles, as well
 
 
Fig. 1.2. The permanent upper and lower dental arches of the gorilla, with cusp terminology and terms of position within the oral cavity. Drawn by Linda E. Curtis.
as the functionally important crests connecting them in various ways on the occlusal surfaces, have had different names through the years. Since there is still frequent confusion regarding dental terminology in the literature, the terms used in this book as well as some of the more common synonymies are presented in Table 1.2.
Many of the terms presented in Table 1.2 were suggested in the late nineteenth century for the cusp names of mammalian molar teeth by E. D. Cope(1888)andH.F.Osborn(1888).This terminologywasbasedontheir interpretation of the origin of the tritubercular upper and lower mammalianmolarpatternsthat becameknown as the TritubercularTheory.As mentioned, other terms have been proposed for the major cusps through the years, but the original names are so well entrenched, and their weaknesses and strengths so well recognized and understood by odontologists, that I have used them in this book. This is often referred to as the Cope–Osborn nomenclature for the principal cusps of mammalian molars (Fig. 1.2). For other views on the fascinating subject of the evolution of mammalianmolarsand the namingof the principal cusps,one should read the contributions of Vandebroek (1961) and Hershkovitz (1971).
Today it is known that the reptilian single cusp of the upper jaw is the paracone, not the protocone as thought by Cope. After the evolution of the protocone the molars evolved into a triangular pattern which Simpson (1936) termed tribosphenic (from the Greek tribein, to rub; sphen, a wedge), which better describesthe grinding functions of the protoconeand talonid basin along with the alternating and shearing action of the trigon and trigonid (Fig. 1.3). The upper molar is a three-cusped triangle, formed by the paracone, metacone, and protocone, known as the trigon (Fig. 1.3). The hypocone appears later and is added to the distolingual surface of upper molars forming the talon (Fig. 1.3). The lower molar has a trigonid (-id is the suffix added to the terms of all lower teeth) consisting of the paraconid, metaconid and protoconid (note, protoconid is the correct designation for the original cusp of the reptilian lower molars). In the majorityof extant primates,with the exceptionof Tarsius,theparaconid is absent. The talonid develops on the distal aspect of the trigonid and often bears three cusps, hypoconid, entoconid, and hypoconulid (Fig. 1.3). A cingulum (cingulid) girdled the tribosphenic molar and portions of it may be present on the teeth of extant primates. When present, these structures are known as styles (stylids) and are named for their related cusp, e.g., paracone (parastyle). The molars of all extant primates are derived from the tribosphenic pattern; indeed, all living mammals, with the exception of monotremes, are descended from Cretaceous ancestors with tribosphenic molars (Butler, 1990). This has been the accepted theory of mammalian Table 1.2. Tooth nomenclature
This book	Synonymy
Upper teeth
Paracone (O)	Eocone (Vb)
Protocone (O)	Epicone (Vb)
Metacone (O)	Distocone (Vb)
Hypocone (O)	Endocone (Vb)
Metaconule (O)	Plagioconule (Vb)
Protoconule (O)	Paraconule (Vb)
Distoconulus (R)	Postentoconule (H)
Parastyle (O)	Mesiostyle (Vb)
Mesostyle (O)	Ectostyle-1 (H)
Metastyle (O)	Distostyle (Vb)
Distostyle (K)	—
Carabelli cusp	Protostyle (O)
Postprotostyle (K)	Interconule (R)
Preprotocrista (VV)	Protoloph (O)
Crista obliqua (R)	Postprotocrista (VV)
Entocrista (H)	—
Premetacrista (S)	—
Postmetacrista (S)	—
Trigon basin (S)	Protofossa (VV)
Lower teeth
Paraconid (O)	Mesioconid (Vb)
Protoconid (O)	Eoconid (Vb)
Metaconid (O)	Epiconid (Vb)
Entoconid (O)	Endoconid (Vb)
Hypoconid (O)	Teloconid (Vb)
Hypoconulid (O)	Distostylid (Vb)
Mesiostylid (Vb)	—
Ectostylid (K)	—
Protostylid (K)	Postmetaconulid (H)
Tuberculum intermedium (R)	Postentoconulid (H)
Tuberculum sextum (R)	Protolophid (VV)
Protocristid (S)	Premetacristid (H)
Cristid obliqua (S)	—
Postentocristid (H)	Paralophid (VV)
Paracristid (S)	—
Postmetacristid (S)	—
Trigonid basin (S)	Prefossid (VV)
Talonid basin (S)	Postfossid (VV)
Sources: H, Hershkovitz (1971); K, Kinzey (1973); O, Osborn (1907); R, Remane (1960);
S, Szalay (1969); Vb, Vandebroek (1961); VV, Van Valen (1966). Reprinted from Swindler, D. R. (1976) Dentition of Living Primates, with permission of Acadmic Press Inc. (London) Ltd.
 
Fig. 1.3. The generalized upper and lower mammalian molar pattern. Reprinted from Simpson, G. G. (1937). The beginning of the age of mammals, Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 12, 1–47, Fig. 11, p.28.
Reprinted with the permission of Cambridge University Press.
molarevolutionuntilrecently.Thediscoveryofnew pre-Cretaceousfossils with fully developed tribosphenic molars challenges the current idea concerning the timing of divergence of the main extant mammalian groups. It now appears that there may have been a dual origin of the tribosphenic molar (Luo, Cifelli and Kielan-Jawarowska, 2001). According to their hypothesis, a lineage with a tribosphenic molar radiated in southern Gondwanaland, giving rise to monotremes. The other lineage with a tribosphenicmolar, evolved in the northern landmassof Laurasia, into the marsupials and placental mammals of today. This new paradigm will certainly engender controversy until it is either accepted or rejected. The evolutionary significance of the tribosphenic molar was clearly stated by Simpson (1936, p.810) when he wrote ‘This is the most important and
potent type of molar structure that has ever been evolved.’
One of the most comprehensivestudies of the evolution of primate teeth still remains The Origin and Evolution of the Human Dentition (1922) by William King Gregory. Of course, this book is dated; however, it still contains much of interest to all students of primate dental evolution. The original permanent mammalian dental formula was:
I-C-P-M/ I -C -P -M ×2=44
	  	
The majority of early primates had lost one incisor, and by the Eocene, premolar reduction had begun. The first (central) incisor is usually considered the missing member of the group and premolar reduction occurs from mesial to distal as explained below.
Primates have two sets of teeth, deciduous (also known as milk or primary) and permanent. The deciduous teeth, incisors, canines, and premolars emerge into the oral cavity before the permanent incisors, canines, and premolars that replace them, while the permanent molars emerge distally to the deciduous teeth (Chapter 3). The number and class of teeth in each quadrant of the jaw can be written for both deciduous and permanent teeth as a dental formula:
di-dc-dp/ di -dc -dp ×2=20
	 	
I-C-P-M/ I -C -P -M ×2=32
	  	
In this example, the formulas represent the deciduous and permanent dentitions of all catarrhine primates. A question arises regarding the designation of the deciduous cheek teeth. Since these teeth are actually the deciduous third and fourth premolars of other mammals and are replaced by the permanent third and fourth premolars, they should be called deciduous premolars (Delson, 1973; Hillson, 1996). However, the terms of humandentistryhavenot includedmammaliandentalevolutionarytheory and have generally prevailed through the years. A similar issue exists regarding the permanent premolars: as noted above, there were originally four premolars in each quadrant of ancient mammalian jaws, but in all living primates, at least the first premolar has been lost. Hence, most prosimians and all platyrrhines have three premolars. Some genera have alsolost more thanone. Asecondpremolar has beenlostin allcatarrhines. The remaining permanent premolars then are properly identified as P2, P3 and P4 or P3 and P4; however, traditional dentistry refers to them as P1 and P2. The zoological terminology is used in this book.

2 Dental anatomy
Anatomy
A typical mammalian tooth (Fig. 2.1) consists of a crown formed of enamel that covers the exposed, oral portion of the tooth. The principal mass of a tooth is composed of dentine, which is covered by the protective enamel crown; cementum surrounds the dentine of the tooth root. The central portion of the tooth is the pulp made up of soft tissues containing bloodvesselsandnerveswhichenter thetooth throughtheapicalforamen. The mammalian tooth has a crown, cervix (neck), and root; this structure results from the way the tooth attaches to the jaw (Peyer, 1968). In most mammals, and all primates, the tooth root is anchored in a bony alveolus by a suspensory ligament, the periodontal ligament, which forms a fibrous joint known as a gomphosis. The bony alveolus covers the root up to the region of the cementoenamel junction, that is, the neck or cervical portion of the tooth. According to Peyer (1968), the neck is present only if its diameter is smaller than the crown. This definition eliminates the teeth of non-mammals and some mammals, but includes the teeth of all primates.
  We have seen that primate teeth can be separated on the basis of form, position, and function into incisors, canines, premolars, and molars. This is a heterodontdentition and can be contrastedwith a homodont dentition wheretheteethconsistof a singlecuspthat issimilarinshapefromincisors to molars, as for example, those found in many sea mammals. In primates, the upper incisors are generally chisel-shaped cutting and nibbling teeth; the lower incisors in most prosimians form a dental comb consisting of procumbent (extending forward from the lower jaw) incisors and canines, if present. Primate upper and lower canines are cone-shaped piercing teeth except in those prosimian genera where the lower canines join the incisors to form the dental comb. Premolarsare transitional teeth situated between the anterior cutters and piercers and the posterior grinders and may have one to multiple cusps. In some species, there is a tendency for the most anterior premolar to become caniniform, and the most posterior premolar may be molariform. The molars possess anywhere from three to five major cusps. The premolars and molars, often called cheek teeth, form the main
12
Anatomy

Fig. 2.1. The components of a mammalian tooth. Reprinted from Swindler, D. R. (1998) Introduction to the Primates, with permission of the University of Washington Press.
crushing and grinding teeth. There is recent evidence, however, suggesting that these terms do not describe what teeth do and that  Such terms are members of a large family of words that simply denote fracture and, by masquerading as explanation, have stunted the understanding of how teeth work  (Lucas and Teaford, 1994, p.183; see below and Chapter 4).
  Mammalian molars display a variety of shapes and forms adapted for mastication. Although primate molars never express some of the extreme conditions seen in other mammals, the following terms are useful in describing their morphology. Molar crowns that tend to be wide and low are brachydont, whereas a hypsodont molar possesses a relatively high crown. When molars have separate, low, and moderately rounded cusps they are termed bunodont. If the cusps are aligned in linear ridges either transverse or oblique to the long axis of the occlusal surface the tooth is said to be lophodont. A final cusp arrangement, not found in primates, results when the cusps expand into crescents forming a selenodont molar, as found in deer, goats, and sheep.
  A useful method enabling odontologists, particularly paleoanthropologists, to identify isolated teeth is to proceed in the following order. First, establish whether the tooth is deciduous or permanent (set trait); second, decide whether it is an incisor, canine, premolar, or molar (class trait); third, establish whether it is a maxillary or mandibular tooth (arch trait); and fourth, determine its position, e.g. first, second or third permanent molar (type trait). Because this book is concerned primarily with the teeth of non-human primates, there are also differences among families, genera, and species that will be discussed in later chapters.
Enamel
The tooth crown is covered with a normally smooth layer of enamel that is semi-translucent, varying in color from a light yellow to a grayish white. Enamel is the hardest biological structure in an animal s body, varying from 5 to 8 on the Mohs scale of hardness of minerals, where talc is 1 and diamond is 10. Enamel attains its full thickness before the teeth emerge into the oral cavity. Enamel is thicker over the cusps of unworn permanent premolars and molars, thinner around the cervical region. Deciduous teeth have thinner enamel than permanent teeth and may be slightly whiter.
  Mature enamel is mostly inorganic calcium phosphate, about 96%, and belongs to the hydroxyapatite mineral group, which is found only in mammalian tissues (Hillson, 1996). Enamel formation is initiated along the dentinoenamel junction (Fig. 2.2) between the ameloblasts (enamelforming cells) and odontoblasts (dentine-forming cells) when the latter commence to secrete predentine, which, in turn, almost immediately stimulates the ameloblasts to secrete the enamel matrix. It is interesting to note that enamel will not form in the absence of odontoblasts. Transplanted ameloblasts fail to form enamel unless accompanied by odontoblasts. The process begins at the incisal or cusp tips and proceeds down along the sides of the tooth. Soon after enamel matrix formation begins, inorganic calcified crystals appear, indicating the beginning of calcification. Thus, enamel formation involves matrix secretion followed by maturation.Enamelformsincrementally,reflectingthespeedingupandslowing down of enamel secretion, and the closer the enamel layer is to the surface of the crown the more mineralized (denser) it becomes.
  The basic histological structure of mammalian enamel is calcified rods or prisms that extend from the dentinoenamel junction to the external surface of the tooth. Enamel prisms have received a great deal of attention through the years because they appear in three patterns that may differ among primates and thus have proved useful for taxonomic allocations Enamel

Fig. 2.2. Tooth germ showing formation of enamel and dentine. Reprinted from Aiello, L. and Dean, C. (1990) An Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy. Reprinted with the permission of Academic Press.
(Boyde, 1976; Boyde and Martin, 1984; Gantt, 1982, 1986; Martin, 1985; Hillson, 1996). The three major shapes or patterns of prism cross-sections have been identified by Boyde (1969, 1976). These are: pattern 1, round closed circular enamel prisms formed by medium-sized ameloblasts; pattern 2, prisms arranged in alternate rows with an open surface and formed by small ameloblasts; pattern 3, prisms keyhole-shapedand formed by the largest ameloblasts (Fig. 2.3). The three patterns have been found in all primates; however, patterns 1 and 3 are more common in hominoids, and pattern 2 seems to be more frequent in Old World monkeys (Aiello and Dean, 1990).
  Other important structures in enamel are the striae of Retzius and incremental lines. The striae of Retzius are lines of light brown to near black when seen in transmitted light microscopy, which cross the prism boundaries in arc-like layers beginning at the dentinoenamel junction and terminatingat the enamelsurface. The regularstriae of Retziusare formed incrementally and are associated with surface perikymata. They vary in periodicity among primates during odontogenesis from 3 days in Victoriapithecusto 9 or 10 days in humansand great apes (personal communication, C. Dean). There are also other  accentuated markings  that look like striae of Retzius but these result from various disturbances that occur during odontogenesis, however, they are  crucial to histological studies of

Fig. 2.3. Schematic illustration of prismatic enamel. Courtesy of David G.Gantt.
tooth growth since they mark both the internal structure and the surfaces of enamel (perikymata) and dentine forming at one time period  (Dean, 2000, p.120, italics mine). Other lines, the incremental lines (known as short period lines or daily cross-striations) are visible between the longperiod striae of Retzius when viewed with polarized light and other forms Enamel
of microscopy (Dean, 1989, 2000). Cross-striations or varicosities represent the circadian rhythmicnature of the secretory cellcycle during enamel formation and appear as dark lines crossing the prisms. Although there is some debate regarding the nature of the cellular mechanisms controlling these circadian cycles  these short-period incremental lines allow estimates of the linear daily secretion rate of enamel  (Schwartz and Dean, 2000, p.214). Indeed, Dean (2000, p.129) is hopeful that incremental lines, also found in dentine and cementum, along with  New discoveries in developmental biology and evolutionary biology will eventually mean that we can ask more focused questions about the nature of the relationship between ontogeny and phylogeny. 
  As we shall see in later chapters, enamel thickness varies a great deal among extant and extinct primates. Much evolutionary and taxonomic importancehasbeenattachedtotheplethoraofstudiesthat haveappeared duringthe past several decades (Martin, 1985; Shellis et al., 1998). Because teeth are the primary organs responsible for reducing a wide variety of foodswithdifferentphysicalpropertiestodigestibleparticlesduringmastication, it is understandable that there have been so many studies of primate enamel thickness. There is no doubt that primate taxa feeding on hard objects have relatively thicker enamel than taxa feeding on softer substances,but what is important to remember taxonomicallyis that these taxa may none the less be closely related (Dumont, 1995). What is becoming ever more clear to students studying the causal relation between tooth form and function is clearly stated by Strait (1997, p.199):  The physical propertiesof the foods that teeth encounterduring mastication may be the primary factor affecting changes in dental morphology.  Indeed, this was appreciatedby LucasandTeaford(1994,p.183)whentheywrote Thefirst step toward understanding dental-dietary adaptations is to consider the fracture properties of foods, because it is to these that teeth are ultimately adapted. In addition, as we study primate teeth it will be well to remember that the endurance of a tooth can be extended by having thicker enamel or increasing the size of the tooth (Lucas, Corlett and Luke, 1986a). Variations in enamel thickness among primates will be considered further in the chapters on the different primate taxa.
  Thereare severaltypes of enameldefect present in primateteeth (Brook, 1998). One important defect is enamel hypoplasia, a deficiency of enamel thickness,whichoccursduringthesecretoryphaseofamelogenesis(Goodman and Rose, 1990; this is also an excellent review of enamel hypoplasias in humans, as is the recent contribution of Guatelli-Steinberg and Lukacs (1999) for non-human primates). Enamel hypoplasias may be expressed in several ways, e.g. pits, single sharp horizontal lines, single grooves or furrows in the crown surface (Hillson, 1996; Hillson and Bond, 1997; Guatelli-Steinberg, 2000). Reid and Dean (2000) have also presented new methods for estimating the timing of linear enamel hypoplasia (LEH) in the anterior teeth of humans. Although used for years as an indicator of non-specific systemic stresses during crown development in humans, studies of enamel hypoplasia have a rather checkered history among non-human primates (Guatelli-Steinberg and Lukacs, 1999; GuatelliSteinberg, 2000). The term linear enamel hypoplasia (LEH) is generally used to designate faint or deeper lines or grooves on the surface of a tooth crown(Goodman andRose, 1990; Guatelli-Steinberg,2000) andthis is the definitionacceptedhere.Thedefectformsdue toaphysiologicalstress,e.g. disease or poor nutrition, that disturbs enamel matrix formation, resulting in a deficiency of enamel thickness. In contrast to bone, enamel does not remodel, and once formed, the defect is permanently implanted in the enamel.
  The most comprehensive studies and reviews of the prevalence and incidence of LEH in non-human primates are those of Guatelli-Steinberg (1998; Guatelli-Steinberg and Lukacs, 1999; Guatelli-Steinberg and Skinner, 2000). More details relating to the occurrence and frequency of LEH among different primate taxa will be considered in the general dental information sections of later chapters.
Dentine
Dentine (ivory) is not as mineralized as enamel, therefore it is softer than enamelbut harder than bone. Dentinemakes up the bulk of a tooth andits root.It iscomposed of collagenand hydroxyapatiteand is more compressible and elastic than enamel. It is covered by the enamelcrown. Cementum surrounds the root (Fig. 2.1). As with enamel, dentine formation occurs in two stages, organic matrix secretion and mineralization. Dentine tubules containing odontoblasts transverse the dentine from the dentinoenamel junction and dentinocemental junction to the pulp chamber.
  It is also well known that during dentine formation the various systemic rhythms that affect the development of enamel result in incremental lines in dentine (Dean, 2000). In contrast to ameloblasts, odontoblasts remain capableof beingproductivethroughouttheirlives. Afterthe completionof tooth growth they produce secondary dentine. As enamel wears down during attrition, the production of secondary dentine increases, recognizableassmallareasofdarktissueontheocclusalsurface.Eventually,it may form the entire occlusal surface of the tooth. The presence of secondary Cementum
dentineprotects the pulp chamber from exposure as enamelis worn away.
  Another physiological product of the odontoblasts is a hypermineralized form of dentine containing few, if any, collagen fibers, known as peritubular dentine. More than fifty years ago Gustafson (1950) and later Miles (1963) noted that, in ground sections of teeth, the roots tend to become more translucent in older teeth, which can be useful in estimating the approximate age of an individual. This transparency or sclerosis is due to the peritubular dentine matrix that continues to form as teeth get older. It is interesting to note that Drusini, Calliari and Volpe (1991), using an image analyzer, did not find any difference between this method and that of measuring the transparent area directly on tooth sections.
  We have mentioned a few of the many investigations of the microstructure of enamel in the last several decades that have aided in sorting out some of the knotty problems in primate systematics of both extinct and extant primates, and considered their usefulness in establishing criteria for better understanding their growth, development, and maturation. For one reason or another, investigation of the microanatomy of dentine has not keptpacewiththat ofenamel,althoughtheimportanceofdentinefordaily incremental studies has been known since Schour and Hoffman (1939) (reported in Dean (1993)) as has the probable taxonomic significance of dentine organization (Hildebolt et al., 1986). In the study by Dean (1993 p.199) he found that the daily rates of dentine formation on macaque tooth roots were consistently between 3 and 4 m per day, suggesting  a consistent rate of dentine formation in permanent macaque teeth.  Hildebolt et al. (1986, p.45) studied dentine tubule density and patterning among Canis, Papio and Homo; allowing for the small sample sizes, the authors concluded that  dentine does have important taxon-specific structuralcharacteristicsthat areof usein phylogeneticandtaxonomicstudies. 
Cementum
Cementum develops over the root dentine and generally extends around the enamel at the cervix. Cementum is produced by cementoblasts that form two types of cementum, cellular and acellular. Cellular cementum is less hard than enamel or dentine, being more similar to bone except that it does not resorb and reform, rather, it grows by apposition, layer by layer. Remodeling can occur, however. When cementum is destroyed by odontoclasts,cementoblastscanrepairthedamagedareas(Hillson,1996).Since cementum surrounds the tooth root, fibers of the periodontal ligament pass from the alveolar bone to attach to the cementum in helping to support the tooth in its alveolus. Cementum adds to the size and strength of a tooth as well as protecting the underlying dentine.
  Cementum lines or annuli have proven useful as a means of estimating chronological age in primates (Wada, Ohtaishi and Hachiya, 1978; Yoneda,1982;Kayetal.,1984). As notedbyKayetal.(1984)therearestill several questions regarding the interpretation of cementum annuli for age estimations. These and related problems are considered more thoroughly by Hillson (1996) and Dean (2000).
Tooth roots
Primate teeth usually have one, two, or three roots, although there may be extra or reduced root formation in most classes of teeth. In general, root reduction is more common than root increase, although both variations of root numbers have been reported for most classes of primate teeth (Bennejeant,1936; Remane, 1960; James, 1960; Alexandersen,1963; Miles and Grigson, 1990). An unusually high incidence (40%) of two-rooted maxillary canines in female Macaca fuscata was described by Yoshikawa and Deguchi (1992). All males had single roots. Two-rootedmaxillary and mandibular canines have been reported in primates (De Terra, 1905; Alexandersen, 1963), but evidently it is quite rare (Swindler, 1995).
  Rootsbeginto developafterenamelanddentinehavereachedthefuture cementoenamel junction. At this time the epithelial root sheath is formed, which,inturn,initiatesrootformation.Therootconsistsofthepulpcavity surrounded by dentine and cementum. On occasion, cells of the epithelial root sheath may form ameloblasts and produce droplets of enamel between or on the surface of the roots. These are known as  enamel pearls .
Dental pulp
Dentalpulpoccupies thepulpcavityandis surroundedbydentine(seeFig. 2.1). Pulp consists of a variety of tissues among which are arteries and veins, nerves, and lymphatic vessels that become more fibrous and less vascular with age. These structures enter and leave the tooth through the apical foramen situated at the tip of the root. The pulp projects toward the cusps of multicusped teeth and is known as pulp horns. When pulp is exposed, whatever the cause, the result is severe pain.

3 Dental development
Heterodont dentitions
According to Butler (1967), Bateson in 1894 first noticed that teeth resembled vertebrae, digits, and other serial structures. He called this phenomenon ‘merism’ and described the propertiesof a meristic series. The term is still used today to describe a heterodont dentition as a metameric system, i.e. different teeth have different morphologies and functions along the tooth row (Weiss, 1990).
  The teeth of placental mammals have evolved from teeth possessing a single cusp (homodont). Moreover, morphological differences among the different classes of teeth, e.g. between canines and premolars, are more abrupt in some primate taxa than in others. Generally, the differences among classes of teeth are more distinct in the human dentition (Scott and Turner, 1997) than in the dentitions of many non-human primate taxa, particularly in the posterior teeth. In studying heterodont teeth through the years various explanations have been offered regarding the control of their complex development. Butler (1939) proposed the morphogenetic field theory in which there are three developmental fields: incisor, canine, and molar. Within each field there is a polar tooth affecting tooth development; for example, the upper first incisor is more stable than the second incisor and in both the upper and lower jaws the first molar is more stable than the second molar, which in turn is more stable than the third molar. Thus in each field the influence or gradient becomes less as the distance becomes greater from the polar tooth. In other words, there is the assumption that extrinsic field substances mediate the gradients along the tooth row.
  Another theory that offered an explanation for the development of heterodont tooth morphology and gradients is known as the clone model (Osborn, 1978). Osborn suggested that originally there were three primordia associated with the different tooth classes from which additional primordiawere added by cloning, which produces tooth-specific morphology along the tooth row. A major difference between the clone model and the field theory is that the former posits that development of the tooth is
21
induced from within the tooth germ, i.e. intrinsic, whereas the latter holds that control of development is extrinsic, being entirely within the field substance or morphogenes.
  It is recognized that both theories have certain strengths as well as weaknesses. Indeed, Greenfield (1992, p.118), in explaining the development of incisification of the deciduous mandibular canines in various anthropoid taxa, proposed a model in which field effects as well as those of cloning occur, ‘but at generally different stages of dental development.’ After careful analyses of both models and of much experimental dental research at that time, Scott and Turner (1997, p.83) concluded that ‘Both models offer useful insights into the nature of gradients in the dentition, but some pieces of the intriguing puzzle continue to elude researchers.’
Genetics
Within the past couple of decades there has been a veritable explosion of researchinthefieldsofdevelopmentalbiologyandgeneticsthathashadan enormous influence on studies of tooth formation (see Hall, 1992; Schwartz, 1999, for general studies; Weiss, 1990, 1993; Sharpe, 2000; Jernvall and Thesleff, 2000; Zhao, Weiss and Stock, 2000 for tooth formation studies). A great deal of this research has been stimulated by the discovery of a class of regulatory genes known as homeobox genes. These genes control an animal’s early development, and although much of this material is beyond the scope of this book, a better understanding of the mechanismsinvolvedinthe earlydevelopmentof teethis being achievedas a result of this research (Tucker, Matthews and Sharpe, 1998; Sharpe, 2000). For example, regarding mammalian dental development, Weiss (1990, p.19) stated ‘that genes like those discussed above (Hox genes) [italics mine] are responsible for the critical events in neural crest specialization that define the commitmentto dental development,setting in motion the cascade of gene regulation that leads to morphological specialization of the teeth.’ This is an exciting time in the field of basic dental research, and perhaps before too long explanations will be forthcoming regarding how both continuous (metrical) and quasi-continuous (non-metrical) traits are controlled and to what extent each is due to ‘nature or nurture.’
  The majority of genetic investigations of primate teeth have been conducted on one primate, Homo sapiens, and have mostly been concerned with developmental defects, dental anomalies, and epidemiological surveys.Forexample,ScottandTurner(1997)note thatinMcKusick’s(1990) book on human inheritance, none of the commonly occurring dental traits Odontogenesis	23
has well-established modes of inheritance. However, it has long been accepted that tooth development, morphology, and size are genetically determined (Lasker, 1950; Kraus, 1957; Moorrees, 1957). This information is based on population studies (Campbell, 1925; Pedersen, 1949; Selmer-Olsen, 1949; Moorrees, 1957), as well as family and twin studies (Osborne,Horowitz andDe George, 1958; Saheki, 1958;Biggerstaff, 1970; Sofaer et al., 1972; Townsend et al., 1988, 1992).
  There is disagreement regarding the inheritance of human tooth size as towhich sexchromosomethe gene(s)is (are) on. Somemaintainit is on the X chromosome (Garn, Lewis and Kerewsky, 1964, 1965, 1967; Aas, 1983); otherinvestigators concludethat genes on both the X and Y chromosomes influence tooth size (Alvesalo, 1971; Alvesalo and Tigerstedt, 1974). And, of course, some researchers hypothesize that tooth size is governed by geneson theautosomal chromosomesandthat neitherthe Xor Y chromosomes expresses any influence on tooth size (Niswander and Chung, 1968; Goose, 1971). There are, as far as I know, two studies on the mediation of tooth size in non-human primates. Sirianni and Swindler (1972, 1975) studied the inheritance of deciduous tooth dimensions in Macaca nemestrina and concluded that there was little evidence to support the X chromosome hypothesis, although Y chromosome involvement was considered to be a possibility in these monkeys. To date, there is little if any information relating to the mode of inheritance of dental traits in nonhuman primates. It is assumed that tooth size and non-metric traits in non-human primates are under genetic controls similar to those operating in humans and other animals. This seems a reasonable assumption in view of our knowledge of genetics today. For this reason, I have not felt it necessary to go into detailed discussions of human dental genetics. This topic is clearly presented in both detail and breadth by Hillson (1996) and Scott and Turner (1997). Indeed, Hillson (1996, p.100) offered a plausible interpretation of the role of genetics on the dentition when he wrote
It does seem clear that there is a strong genetic component in the distribution of at least some non-metrical features but, if they really are inherited in a quasi-continuous fashion, then all of the factors that control inheritance of continuous variants must similarly apply.
Odontogenesis
Teeth are considered skin derivatives, as are hair, feathers, and scales. But are they? This traditional scenario is currently being challenged. For example, Smith and Coates (2000 p.147) maintain that much evidence today demonstrates that many of the processes involved in the development of teeth ‘occurred at loci early in vertebrate phylogeny, preceding the origin of jaws and challenging accepted assumptions about dermal denticles and armour preceding initial stages of dental evolution.’ In other words, teeth and jaws evolved as relatively independent events.
  Teeth form only at the junction between ectoderm and mesoderm (mesenchyme). Enamel is ectodermal in origin whereas dentine, pulp, and cementumoriginatefrom theoral mesenchymethat originatesfrom neural crest cells near the midbrain at a very early stage of development. From here, the neural crest cells migrate down along the side of the head to come to lie in the maxillary and mandibular processes that already contain epithelial cells. During their journey the mesenchymal cells, now known as ectomesenchyme, separate into bone primordia and tooth primordia. Butler (1967) suggested that this early sorting process into tooth primordia may represent the fundamental differentiation of the dentition. In any case, the interactions between the epithelium and ectomesenchyme direct odontogenesis,beginningwith theformationof thedentallamina,whichis a thickening of the ectodermal part of the oral epithelium. Soon after the appearance of the dental lamina, enlargements form along it in both jaws, correspondingto the future locations of the deciduous teeth. These are the tooth buds. Sometime later, successional laminae appear as lingual extensions from each of the deciduous tooth buds representing the permanent incisors, canines, and premolars. Because the permanent molars do not have deciduous predecessors the dental lamina extends distally, allowing for the development of the permanent molars.
  Thelife cycle of a tooth is shownin Fig. 3.1 and consistsof the following stages.
1. Growth: (a) initiation; (b) proliferation; (c) histodifferentiation; (d) morphodifferentiation; (e) apposition
2. Calcification (mineralization)
3. Emergence
4. Attrition
These sequential events are not completely separated; rather, there is considerable overlap and many are continuous over several stages as depicted in Fig. 3.1. Only a few comments will be made here regarding these stagessince there are many textbookson dental embryologyand oral histologyavailableformorecompletediscussionsoftheseimportantissues regarding the life cycles of teeth (Ten Cate, 1994).
  As mentioned, tooth buds form along the dental lamina representing the deciduous and permanent teeth. Lack of initiation of a tooth bud,
  

Fig. 3.1. The life cycle of a tooth. Reprinted from Schour, I. and Massler, M. (1940) Studies in tooth development: the growth patterns of human teeth, Journal of the American Dental Association 27, 1778–93, Fig. 1. Copyright © 1940 American Dental Association. Reprinted by Permission of ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.
Cambridge Books Online © Cambridge University Press, 2009
  
however, results in absence of a tooth, whereas abnormal initiation may result in supernumerary teeth, e.g. the appearance of fourth molars in orangutans. As cell proliferation continues the bud stage forms the cap stage, which develops into the bell stage as the tooth germ continues to increaseinsizeandmature.Itis alsowellknownthat explantsof thedental lamina (even before tooth-bud formation) continue to develop into their respective teeth when grown in tissue cultures (Glasstone, 1963, 1966). Histodifferentiation and morphodifferentiation occur together from the bud stage to the final phases of the bell stage. Perturbations in morphodifferentiation can result in various malformed teeth, e.g. loss of cusps, extra cusps,andpeg-shapedteeth. Appositionalgrowthof enamelanddentineis layer-likeand known as additive growth.These periods of activityand rest alternate at intervals that are useful in aging teeth as discussed in Chapter 2. Enamel and dentine formation always begins at the cusp tips and along the incisal borders of incisors. Insufficient enamel apposition can result in enamel hypoplasia.
  As the cells of the inner enamel epithelium (IEE) begin to differentiate and divide (mitosis) they cause the IEE to fold and buckle, resulting in the formation of grooves, cusps, and crests on the future occlusal surface (Fig. 3.2)whichultimatelydeterminetheformofthetoothcrown(Butler,1956). The junction between the dentine-forming cells and those forming enamel is known as the dentinoenamel junction (DEJ). Dentine and enamel continue to form along either side of this basement membrane,and do so until the crown is formed, at which time the ameloblasts die. The odontoblasts, however, continue to produce dentine (secondary dentine) throughout the life of the tooth as discussed in the previous chapter. Enamel apposition begins at the cusp tips and spreads downward over the surface and sides of the crown to the cementoenameljunction. During this periodof mineralization the cusps continue to grow apart and enamel thickens over the tooth crown until the cusps coalesce, signaling the final size of the tooth crown.
Ontogeny of crown patterns
Almost fifty years ago Butler (1956, p.45) declared that odontologists ‘have been interested for the most part either in the earliest stages of development or in histological problems, and have paid little attention to morphological features.’ A few years later, the late Bertram S. Kraus (1959a,b, 1963) accepted the gantlet with a series of papers concerned with the morphological development of the deciduous teeth of humans. Then Kraus and Jordan (1965) published The Human Dentition Before Birth, a Crown patterns

Fig. 3.2. Histodifferentiation (bell stage of development). Reprinted from Schour, I. and Massler, M. (1940) Studies in tooth development: the growth of human teeth, Journal of the American Dental Association 27, 1778–93, Fig. 2. Copyright © 1940 American Dental Association. Reprinted by Permission of ADA Publishing, a Division of ADA Business Enterprises, Inc.
seminal study of the morphogenesis of the human deciduous dentition. It was during this time that the author began his studies of the different mineralization patterns of the deciduous and permanent teeth of nonhuman primates (Swindler, 1961).
  In studies of crown odontogenesis, the tooth germ is removed by dissection from its crypt and placed in an aqueous solution of alizarin red S. After remaining in the solution for variable periods of time, the follicle is removed by microdissection. All mineralized areas are stained red and the uncalcifiedregions are clear(Fig. 3.3). The occlusal surfacesare then ready for detailed studies of dental morphogenesis, photography, illustrations and measurements (Swindler and McCoy, 1964; Kraus and Jordan, 1965; Swails, 1993).
Radiographs are used to study tooth formation in longitudinal or

Fig. 3.3. Stained primate tooth buds (alizarin red S) showing the
morphodifferentiation of the lower deciduous teeth at birth plus M . From top

to bottom: Alouatta caraya, Macaca nemestrina, Hylobates klossi, Pan troglodytes and Pongo pygmaeus.
cross-sectional investigations of living animals and simply represent an extension of the studies of prenatal crown formation mentioned above (DeanandWood,1981; SirianniandSwindler,1985; Anemone,Wattsand Swindler, 1991; Swindler and Meekins, 1991; Winkler, Schwartz and Swindler, 1996). It is well known that the various stages of tooth development are not comparable between radiographs and alizarin red S studies, because mineralization is demonstrable histologically before becoming radio-opaque. This means assessments based on radiographs will tend to underestimate the age at which a tooth reaches a particular stage of development (Fig. 3.4).
Crown patterns

Fig. 3.4. Initial calcification of the mandibular first molar. Reprinted from Sirianni and Swindler (1985). Reprinted with permission of CRC Press, Inc.
  Dentaldevelopmentisa continuousprocess frominitialcryptformation to the apical closure that signals the termination of root growth. This developmentalscenario is not only a measure of the biological maturity of thedentition, but also a comparativeyardstick that is useful for measuring the timing and sequence of other developmental systems (Swindler, 1985; Smith, 1989; Smith, Crummett and Brandt, 1994). It is convenient, however,to separate thecontinuuminto stages of crownand root formationas showninFig. 3.5. Allprimateteethpassthroughthesestages, althoughifa tooth begins to form at the same time in two species it may take a longer proportionofthegrowthperiodtodevelopinonespeciesthanintheother. For example, the permanent canines of apes take longer to develop than the permanent canines of humans, whereas the roots of monkeys and apes grow more quickly than the roots of humans (Dean and Wood, 1981;
Swindler, 1985).
  What is known concerning the order of mineralization of the deciduous teeth in primates would suggest that it is the same in Old World monkeys and hominoids, i.e. di1 dp1 di2 dc dp2 (Swindler, 1961; Swindler and McCoy, 1964; Turner, 1963; Kraus and Jordan, 1965; Oka and Kraus, 1969; Tarrant and Swindler, 1972; Siebert and Swindler, 1991; Swindler and Beynon, 1993). The sequence of molar cusp mineralization is similar amongthese taxa.In the mandibleit is protoconid,metaconid,hypoconid, entoconid, and hypoconulid (hominoids only) with some variation between the metaconid and hypoconid. In the maxilla the sequence is

Fig. 3.5. Stages of tooth formation from the tooth crypt to apical closure of the roots. Reprinted from Winkler, L. A. et al. (1996) Development of the Orangutan permanent dentition: Assessing patterns and variation in tooth development, American Journal of Physical Anthropology 99, 205–20, Fig. 1, p.209. Reprinted with the permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Age estimation
paracone, protocone, metacone, and hypocone while the variable cusps are the protocone and metacone (references as above).
  The only study of prenatal dental development in New World monkeys that the author is aware of is that of Tarrant and Swindler (1973), who examined 19 fetuses of black howler monkeys (Alouatta caraya). Because all teeth in the specimens showed some degree of mineralization it was impossible to determine the exact order of initial mineralization. It was found that the dis, dcs, and dp2s calcified from a single center whereas the dp3s had two centers, and the dp4s and M1s had four separate centers of calcification. The order of cusp calcification in dp4s was the same as in catarrhine primates.
  It seems clear that the order of cusp mineralization is similar among the primate taxa discussed above, although the pattern of cusp coalescence of New World monkeys is different from that of Old World monkeys, which in turn is different from that of the hominoids. It has been suggested that the differences between these coalescence patterns are probably associated with the importance of the various ridges and crests connecting the cusps on the occlusal surfaces of the molars (Tarrant and Swindler, 1973; Swindler, 1985).
  The only permanent tooth to begin development prenatally in the non-human primates discussed here is the first molar (see Fig. 3.3), which may have one to three cusps mineralized at birth (Swindler, 1961, Macaca mulatta; Oka and Kraus, 1969, Pan troglodytes; Tarrant and Swindler, 1973, Alouatta caraya; Sirianni and Swindler, 1985, Macaca nemestrina; Siebert and Swindler, 1991, Pan troglodytes; Swindler and Beynon, 1993, Theropithecus gelada). This is also the situation in Homo sapiens (Kraus and Jordan, 1965).
Age estimation
‘Howoldis this animal?’is a questionfrequentlyaskedwhenone isdealing with living non-human primates or working with their skeletons in museums.Aquickwaytoanswerthisquestionis tolookattheteethpresentin an animal’s mouth, a method, as noted by Smith et al. (1994), first used by Aristotle, who was aware that teeth erupt at different ages in different animals and could therefore be used to estimate the animal’s age. We still use this basic biological information when we compile the tables and graphsemployedtoday toestimatean animal’schronologicalagebasedon tooth eruption.
Adolph Schultz (1935) published an extensive paper that became a landmark contribution for studies of the eruption of primate teeth. For decades this paper served as a yardstick by which to measure the maturation of living primates. Through the years, however, many papers have appeared reporting study results regarding the ages of tooth eruption in many primate species. This research has been reviewed and discussedin an extensive compendium that has put together a data base ‘that can serve both practical needs and theoretical interests’ (Smith et al., 1994 p.181). This is an extremely important contribution that will be of value to all evolutionary and developmental biologists interested in the maturation and life histories of primates.
  The estimation of chronological age of non-human primates of feral origin is often critical in research studies. In addition, it is also important to be able to estimate the developmental or maturational stage of the dentition of animals of known age. Such information is valuable when designing experiments concerned with the causal factors influencing, for example, the histo- and morphodifferentiation of the dentition. In other words, knowledge of the timing of events during the growth process is often crucial to the success of the experiment. A physiological perturbation (stress) during the early stages of tooth calcification (secretory phase of amelogenesis) can have results quite different from those that occur if the same metabolic event happens later in the mineralization process. Linear enamel hypoplasia is a good example of such timedependent processes.
  In addition to tooth eruption, intra-osseoustooth formation has proven useful in estimating the chronological age of primates. Indeed, there is evidencethat toothformationis a more reliablemethodof assessingdental maturationthan tooth emergence(GleiserandHunt, 1955; Fanning,1961; Moorrees, Fanning and Hunt, 1963; Haavikko, 1970). A radiographic longitudinal study of the dental development of male and female pigtailed macaques (Macaca nemestrina) of known ages from 6 months to 7 years is presented in Sirianni and Swindler (1985). The dental developmental stages employed in this investigation were similar to those shown in Fig. 3.5. Figures3.6 and3.7 summarizethedental developmentof theselaboratory-born and -reared monkeys. The three development stages in the figures are represented by diamonds: open indicates initial calcification; stippled, crown completion; and solid, root completion with apical closure. The width of the diamond represents the mean age; the height, ± 1 S.D. ‘E’ is approximate age of eruption.
  The majority of information regarding primate tooth emergence as well as radiographic studies of tooth formation is from laboratory-born primates. An obvious question is whether there is any difference in the timing Age estimation

Fig. 3.6. Dental development and the time of tooth emergence of female Macaca nemestrina. Reprinted from Sirianni and Swindler (1985), with Permission of CRC Press, Inc.

Fig. 3.7. Dental development and the time of tooth emergence of male Macaca nemestrina. Reprinted from Sirianni and Swindler (1985), with Permission of CRC Press, Inc.
Permanent tooth formation
Table 3.1. Sequence of permanent mandibular tooth formation in primates
Stage
Sequence
Taxon
Initial calcification
M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Papio cynocephalus

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Macaca nemestrina

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Pongid

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Homo sapiens
Crown complete
M1 I1 I2 [P3 P4 M2] C M3
Papio cynocephalus

M1 I1 I2 [M2 P3 P4] C M3
Macaca nemestrina

M1 I1 I2 P3 [M2 P4] C M3
Pongid

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Homo sapiens
Root formation
M1 I1 I2 M2 [P3 P4] C M3
Papio cynocephalus

M1 I1 I2 M2 [P4 P3] C M3
Macaca nemestrina

M1 I1 I2 P3 [M2 P4] C M3
Pongid

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] C M3
Homo sapiens
Emergence
M1 I1 I2 M2 [P4 P3] C M3
Papio cynocephalus

M1 I1 I2 M2 [P4 P3] C M3
Macaca nemestrina

M1 I1 I2 [M2 P3 P4] C M3
Pongid

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Homo sapiens
Apical closure
M1 I1 I2 M2 [P3 P4] C M3
Papio cynocephalus

M1 I1 I2 M2 [P3 P4] C M3
Macaca nemestrina

M1 I1 I2 M2 P3 P4 C M3
Pongid

M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3
Homo sapiens
Present study.
Present study.
Dean and Wood (1981, includes chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan).
Moorrees et al. (1963).
Reprinted from Swindler, D. R. and Meekins, D. (1991). Dental development of the permanent mandibular teeth in the baboon, Papio cynocephalus. American Journal of Human Biology 3, 571–580. Reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
of dental maturational processes between laboratory-born animals and feralanimals.Thereseemsto be evidencesupporting bothsidesof theissue as there are data indicating a difference (Phillips-Conroy and Jolly, 1988) and a study suggesting no substantial disparity (Kahumbu and Eley, 1991). And, as Smith et al. (1994, p.203) have said, ‘whatever the magnitude of the captive effect, it is fairly certain that it is less than the effect of captivity on skeletal growth, sexual maturation, and body weight.’
Sequence of initial stages of permanent tooth formation
The patterns of initial tooth formation in several primate taxa are presented in Table 3.1. The initial mineralization sequences are the same in all taxa; M1 I1 I2 C P3 [P4 M2] M3. Teeth in the areas of developmental plasticity represent sequence polymorphisms (Garn and Lewis, 1957). By the time of crown completion, the canine has shifted from position four at the beginning of mineralization to position seven in the sequences of all taxa except humans, where it remains the fourth tooth to complete crown formation.Itnormallyremainsthefourthtoothtoemergeandtocomplete apical closure in Homo sapiens. Early completion of crown formation, early emergence, and early apical closure may be correlated with the phylogenetic and ontogenetic reduction of the canine in Homo sapiens.
  The premolar region remains ontogeneticallyvariable throughout tooth formationinallstagesandinall taxa.Althoughrare,the P4M2 emergence pattern is reported in chimpanzees by Clements and Zuckerman (1953) and Krogman (1930) for both chimpanzees and gorillas. On the other hand, the M2 P4 emergence pattern is occasionally observed in humans (Garn and Lewis, 1957). It is interesting then to note that the M2 P4 emergence sequence has always been reported in Old World monkeys and most often in anthropoid apes. Humans, however, can have either P2 M2 or M2 P4 emergence patterns. The data discussed here and presented in Table 3.1 substantiate those of Garn and Lewis (1957), who reminded us that the sequence of emergence cannot always be predicted from the sequence of tooth formation.
  The changes in the rates and patterns of dental development presented inTable 3.1 suggestthat alterationshave occurredinthe regulatorysystem during the phylogeny and ontogeny of primate tooth formation that represent heterochronic changes. Tooth merisms would seem well suited for heterochronic changes, which require only an alteration in the timing of the features already present (Gould, 1977) to produce the sequential changes that occur from initial mineralization to apical closure.
22	Dental development



